<h1>The Problem Solving Framework : 'UPER'</h1>

* U = "Understand"
* P = "Plan"
* E = "Execute"
* R = "Reflect" / "Refactor"

<h2>1. Understanding the Problem</h2>
<P>* So I need to either build an ASCII terminal based game or a GUI-based game using a third-pary Java Framework.</p>
<P>* This program needs to utilize at least one stream/lambda function and an abstract class/interface. </p>
<P>* I will not only need to finish all the requirements before my software presentation, but will also need to complete my UPER, architecture outline, and game instructions documents.</p>
<P>* I will also need to keep OOP Pillars in mind going forward as I plan and build my game.</p>
<P>* Even if the code isn't perfect, I still need to deliver a program that runs without any bugs or glitches in the UI or gameplay.</p>
<P>* I will need to be able to explain my code thoroughly, so will need to comment my classes and methods heavily and try to use easy to understand naming conventions.</p>
<P>* If I want to get all the bonus points possible, I will also need to host my game using a React app.</p>
<P></p>* 
<h2>
    2. Planning the Solution
</h2>
<P>* So, I actually do have a good amount of game design and development experience in other programming languages. In Ruby, I've built an interactive Blackjack game and an online multiplayer chess game using Ruby on Rails and Javascript. I've also written an RPG game using Ruby scripting in RPG Maker 6.0.</p>
<P>* The last game I made was an online Javascript Tetris game. I made this game for practice during our Javascript modules at TEKcamp. I liked the overall design of the app, but the gameplay was rather barebones and had some unresolved bugs.</p>
<P>* For this capstone project, I did think very hard about what kind of game I wanted to make in Java. I really would like to make an Adventure game with a great story and artwork, but given the time alloted, I think that will have to be a project for the future. So, I thought maybe I could try to make another Tetris game in Java and hopefully make it much more feature-rich and responsive than my previous attempt in Javascript, while still keeping some of the same art, textures, and themes I used last time.</p>
<P>* I ended up researching SEVERAL different 3rd party libraries for building games. LibGDX did look beneficial with its HTML compatibility, making it easier to bring into a React app. However, I also looked into Java Swing/JPanel and JavaFX. I have decided to try and build my game using JavaFX for Open SDK 11 (Corretto). This is because I reasearched some very interesting examples of different animation effects and transitions you can use that are visually impressive with minimal code to get set up.</p>
<P>* I have read on forums that JavaFX can have a steep learning curve, but I also found some tutorials that look like they will walk me through getting my basic JavaFX project set up and beginning to build my game UI.</p>
<P>* I have also found some tutorials on creating puzzle games in JavaFX that I might watch for inspiration or just to get familiar with common classes in this library.</p>
<P>* I will now create my Architecture overview UML using GenMyModel that will list the possible classes and inheritors for this project. Please note that this document is just an estimation of the classes and features I will be implementing, but this architecture may change if I have issues delivering the Minimum Viable Product. Features that are lowest priority (wont affect grade) are HighScore saves and Game Sounds and Music. I would ideally love to get all of these features in my final program, but I'll need to focus on the MVP first before going wild with extras.</p>
<h2>
    3. Executing the Plan
</h2>
<h3>Initial steps</h3>
<P>* After finishing my classes Architecture diagram, I then followed the guide linked below by Tim Buchalka for setting up a JavaFX Project for JDK 11 Using IntelliJ. So glad I found this video series because it was a perfect introduction to making my first app in JavaFX. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WtOgoomDewo</p>
<P>* I also did some additional setup and troubleshooting by following the instructions provided in this resource: http://tutorials.jenkov.com/javafx/your-first-javafx-application.html/</p>
<P>* After the initial setup and poking around in JavaFX, I began creating my packages and Classes in my project. I added some placeholder methods and even borrowed some refactored code from my Javascript Tetris game for things like piece rotation and grid generation. These may or may not need to be rewritten, but it's worth a shot to try.</p>

<h3>Building out Classes and Features</h3>
<P>* I continued writing logic and some sudocode when I didn't want to get bogged down in Syntax. When I eventually got stuck and needed some guidance on popular JavaFX classes to use for games like this, I found the following guide for making a very basic Tetris game in JavaFX. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=boAJUSN8fOU&t=9s</p>
<P>* This guide was great for seeing just a simple implementation of Tetris looked like in JavaFX. I followed some parts of the guide to finish writing certain methods I was blocked on getting to work myself. This guide was helpful, but as stated, it is a VERY barebones implementation of the game and I want to add several more advanced features on my own if time allows.</p>
<P>* After getting my logic written and classes set up, I needed to connect the UI and animate the pieces. I used this resource to look up Animations and found some really cool transition effects I'd like to also use for my levels. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/javafx/javafx_animations.htm</p>
<P>* I was able to get animated pieces loading, falling, and rotating as requried after a lot of troubleshooting. I then moved to adding level transition effects that trigger when the player's score reaches certain thresholds. I used this article as a resource: https://thecodinginterface.com/blog/javafx-animated-scene-transitions/</p>
<P>* After several very late nights, the basic features of the game were working. I now could move on to styling the UI, adding more visual flare, and adding my advanced features. I used JavaFX's built in styling to customize colors and background displays. http://www.java2s.com/Code/Java/JavaFX/SetLabelTextcolor.htm</p>
<P>* I looked up some guides on how to save game scores in JavaFX and ended up using the BufferedReader and BufferedWriter Java Classes for my high score saves. I wrote a small Highscore display Modal pop-up using JavaFX classes and then moved on to setting up the saving and loading of a user's .txt file, saved locally. https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/io/BufferedReader.html</p>
<P>* I then followed a few tutorials on setting up sound for JavaFX applications. I used some music I had saved from my previous Tetris game in Javascript to load. I also ripped 8-bit sounds from the original Tetris Game Boy game from a rom file and converted them to .wav format for compatibility. It took a while and a lot of trial and error, but I eventually got sounds and music working. Still need to add mute and volume controls to the UI if time allows. http://www.java2s.com/Code/Java/JavaFX/SetLabelTextcolor.htm
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/23202272/how-to-play-sounds-with-javafx</p>
<P>* My final steps over the weekend will be to continue testing the application and fixing bugs, commenting my code and refactoring for readability, and possibly importing the game into a React app. I will need to do more research on this to see how much time it might take.</p>

<h3>General Requirements Explanations</h3>
<P>* My REQUIRED ABSTRACT CLASS will belong to my "AbstractShape" class and the other shapes will inherit from it. The abstract shape will have common methods that will run for all shape types (rotate, fall, reverse, clear, etc.) and it will be used in conjunction with its lower Shape classes at certain points during the game runtime.</p>
<P>* My REQUIRED INTERFACEs are actually pulled directly from JavaFX and I will implement them from my Highscores and SoundController classes.</p>
<P>* My REQUIRED STREAM function I wrote when I encountered an issue with game slowdown when new pieces were falling. This was happening because my RandomPiece method was having to load every time a piece dropped and it was slowing down the Run() thread. So, I wrote a stream function to generate 50 random, abstract pieces when the game loads or when the level changes. A second stream function then Collects that array list of abstract pieces, shuffles their piece types, and returns them as proper Shapes (or Tetrominos as they are called in Tetris). This stream completely eliminates my game slowdown issue because it's not having to run the randomPiece method every few seconds.</p>
<P>* My REQUIRED LAMBDA function is in my FrontendLogic class and is called "shuffleLambda". My required stream is contained within this function.</p>
<p>* Error Handling: Users cannot break the program with any extra key presses or glitches. If sound or images fail to load or if a high score fails to save, these errors are accounted for and inform the user on troubleshooting options.

</h3>Bonus Requirements Explanations</h3>
<P> Incorporate at least 2 SOLID principles of OOD: </p>
    <p><ol><li>Single Responsibility Priniciple: This principle states that classes and modules should should have responsibility over a single part of the functionality provided by the software, and that responsibility should be entirely encapsulated by the class, module or function. I made sure to separate my project by specific tasks so that when I built my classes, they all had a distinct and singular purpose. For example, I separated my UI initialization class from my UI logic class even though doing so presented some unique challenges to overcome. If I would've kept these two classes combined, the code would be much harder to interpret and the single class would be far too large and be in charge of doing too many tasks at once. I used the following resource to make sure I was properly following this principle:
    https://medium.com/@severinperez/writing-flexible-code-with-the-single-responsibility-principle-b71c4f3f883f</li>
    <li>Open Closed Principle: Robert C. Martin defines the Open/Closed Principle by stating that “Software entities (classes, modules, functions, etc.) should be open for extension, but closed for modification.”
    In my game, I utilized several techniques to accomplish the Open/Closed principle such as using Abstract classes and inheritance to generate my game pieces, making as many variables and classes PRIVATE or Package-Specific as I could, and using Getter and Setter methods to retrieve or set private values. I know that there is certainly more I could do to make this application even more secure, so I welcome input on additional feedback and techniques to continue improving my Open/Closed programming mindset.
    https://stackify.com/solid-design-open-closed-principle/</li>
    <li>Dependency Inversion Principle: This principle states that high-level modules, which provide complex logic, should be easily reusable and unaffected by changes in low-level modules, which provide utility features. I have introduced Abstraction of my game pieces to carry out this principle. The AbstractShape class does not depend on its lower level classes, but instead, takes the place of its lower level classes when loaded into the game in an abstract state. This abstract class is then randomized and assigned to a lower-level class (my "Tetrimino" classes or just the "Shape" class itself) when necessary by the game logic. This way, dependency is split between the high-level and low-level modules by introducing an abstraction between them and utilizing all levels of the classes only when the situation calls for it. 
    https://stackify.com/dependency-inversion-principle/</li></ol> </p>
<P> Incorporate at least 2 Object Oriented Design Patterns: </P>
    <p><ol><li>Facade Pattern: This is a software design pattern that provides a simplified interface to a larger body of code, making the software easier to use, understand, and test if the facade has convenient methods for common tasks. By using the JavaFX library, I am implementing a facade when I build my GameUI class. I am utilizing so many complex Classes by importing the JFX library and simply creating objects of them and defining the parameters, instead of having to create the UI and game framework from scratch. My GamePanel class itself is also a facade because it is built with formulas using arrays and the Pane, Rectangle, and Line classes from JavaFX to initialize the full UI features of the game panel. Then, adding it to the GameUI class is as easy as creating a GamePanel object and the panel displays this data as a simple grid on the UI; the user will not need to know about the many methods and math going on behind the scenes to make the game panel appear on screen. Resources from: http://jargon.js.org/_glossary/FACADE_PATTERN.md  </li>
    <li>Observer pattern: An Observer Defines a one-to-many dependency between objects so that when one object changes state, all its dependents are notified and updated automatically. My game has a few examples of the Observer pattern including the HighScore function. My frontendLogic and gameUI class keep track of my "score" variable and update it in real time during gameplay. However, the HighScore class is always "observing" the game state so that as soon as the "gameOver" method changes the game's state to "stop", the HighScore observer gets the final score and compares it to the saved highscores. If the game's final score is compared as a top 5 score, the score is then sent again to another "Oberserver" class, the FileHandler class, to be saved locally and ultimately displayed on the UI via the Scoreboard class.  </li></ol> </p>
<P> Implement 3rd Party Library: I utilized the JavaFX 3rd party library for my UI, animations, and sound.</P>
<P> Create a Landing page to introduce your game, instructions, and features: <a href="https://treetris.netlify.app/">https://treetris.netlify.app/</a> I decided to create a landing page featuring a link to download my game as an executable JAR file and also include my original Tetris game made in JavaScript that can be played directly on the browser. I unified that layout of the landing page and the Javascript game to match the design of my JavaFX game.</P>

<h2>
    4. Reflection / Refactor
</h2>
<P>* It was definitely a struggle learning an all new library for this project. But I wanted to set my goals high, since I was already familiar with creating text-only games in the console. I am very thankful for all the great resources I found online and for users on stackoverflow.com answering some puzzling issues I was having with certain JavaFX features.</P>
<P>* Looking back, I can't believe how many lines of code it took to create this application and flesh out all of the features. I definitely need to refactor some duplicated code and possibly continue improving things like encapsulation of features to more closely stick to the 4 pillars of OOP.</P>
<P>* My code is still bloated with repetition and bandaid solutions to bugs I encountered along the way. There were certain things in my UI that I had to write duplicate code for to get them to update when certain game methods were called. I fully intend to refactor this bloated code, but my limited knowledge about JavaFX means I will have to do some further research to accomplish this. For now, I'm trying to comment my code thouroughly and rename any methods or variables that aren't clear to their purpose.</P>
<P>* UPDATE: I have gone through every class and made sure every variable is private with any required getters/setters for cross-class access. I have done everything I can (in my limited experience) to make this program as encapsulated as possible.</P>
<p>* I'm still in the process of refactoring my GameUI class to take out the bloated initializer code and turn it all into small methods I can call instead.</p>
*
*
*
*